Dactyloidae are a family of lizards commonly known as anoles ( US : ( listen ) ) and native to warmer parts of the Americas , ranging from southeastern United States to Paraguay . Instead of treating it as a family , some authorities prefer to treat it as a subfamily , Dactyloinae , of the family Iguanidae . In the past they were included in the family Polychrotidae together with Polychrus ( bush anoles ) , but the latter genus is not closely related to the true anoles.Anoles are small to fairly large lizards , typically green or brownish , but their color varies depending on species and many can also change it . In most species at least the male has a dewlap , an often brightly colored flap of skin that extends from the throat/neck and is used in displays . Anoles share several characteristics with geckos , including details of the foot structure ( for climbing ) and the ability to voluntarily break off the tail ( to escape predators ) , but they are only very distantly related , anoles being part of Iguania.Anoles are active during the day and feed mostly on small animals such as insects , but some will also take fruits , flowers , and nectar . They are fiercely territorial . After mating , the female lays an egg ( occasionally two ) ; in many species she may do so every few days or weeks . The egg is typically placed on the ground , but in some species it is placed at higher levels.Anoles are widely studied in fields such as ecology , behavior , and evolution , and some species are commonly kept in captivity as pets . Anoles can function as a biological pest control by eating insects that may harm humans or plants , but represent a serious risk to small native animals and ecosystems if introduced to regions outside their home range . Distribution and habitat Anoles are a very diverse and plentiful group of lizards . They are native to tropical and subtropical South America , Central America , Mexico , the offshore East Pacific Cocos , Gorgona and Malpelo Islands , the West Indies and southeastern United States.A particularly high species richness exists in Cuba ( more than 60 species ) , Hispaniola ( more than 55 ) , Mexico ( more than 50 ) , Central America , Colombia ( more than 75 ) , and Ecuador ( at least 40 ) . Fewer live in eastern and central South America ( for example , less than 20 species are known from huge Brazil ) , Contiguous United States ( 1 native species ) , and the Lesser Antilles ( about 25 species in total , with 1–2 species on each island ) . However , the Lesser Antilles are relatively rich compared to their very small land area and their species are all highly localized endemics , each only found on one or a few diminutive islands . In South America , the diversity is considerably higher west of the Andes ( Tumbes-Chocó-Magdalena region ) than east ( Amazon basin ) , as well illustrated in Ecuador where about ​2⁄3 of the anole species live in the former region and ​1⁄3 in the latter . The only species native to the contiguous United States is the Carolina ( or green ) anole , which ranges as far west as central Texas , and north to Oklahoma , Tennessee and Virginia . Its northern limit is likely related to cold winter temperatures . Several anole species have been introduced to the contiguous US , mostly Florida , but also other Gulf Coast states and California . The most prevalent of these introductions is the brown anole . In contrast to the contiguous United States , Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands are home to 16 native species , all endemic.Anoles inhabit a wide range of habitats , from highlands ( up to at least 2,600 m or 8,500 ft above sea level ) to the coast , and rainforest to desert scrub . A few live in limestone karst habitats and at least two of these , the Cuban cave anole and Mexican cave anole , will enter caves , sometimes occurring as much as 20 m ( 65 ft ) from the entrance . Some species live close to humans and may use fences or walls of building as perches , even inhabiting gardens or trees along roads in large cities like Miami . Most anoles are arboreal or semi-arboreal , but there are also terrestrial and semi-aquatic species . They are often , especially in the Caribbean , grouped into six ecomorphs—crown giant , trunk crown , trunk , trunk ground , twig , and grass bush—that inhabit specific niches . Other less widely used groups are ground , ground bush , twig giant , saxicolous , and riparian ( alternatively semi-aquatic ) . However , the species within each ecomorph group are not entirely alike and there are variations in the details of their niches , including both widespread generalists and more restricted specialists . The niche differentiation allows several anoles to inhabit the same locality , with up to 15 species at a single site . Appearance and behavior Anoles vary in size . Males generally reach a larger size than females , but in a few species it is the other way around . Adults of most anoles are between 4 and 8 cm ( 1.5–3 in ) in snout-to-vent length , and between 10 and 20 cm ( 4–8 in ) in total length , including the tail . In the smallest , the five-striped grass anole , the snout-to-vent length is about 3 and 3.5 cm ( 1.2 and 1.4 in ) in females and males respectively , but it is a relatively long-tailed species . There are several large species that are more than 10 cm ( 4 in ) in snout-to-vent length . Males of the largest , the knight anole , reach up to about 19 cm ( 7.5 in ) in snout-to-vent length , 51 cm ( 20 in ) in total length , and 137 g ( 5 oz ) in weight . There are both robust and gracile species , and the head shape varies from relatively broad to elongate.The tail of anoles varies , but mostly it is longer than the snout-to-vent length . Depending on exact species it can range from slightly shorter to about three times the snout-to-vent . The Caribbean twig ecomorph anoles , proboscis anole and `` Phenacosaurus '' anoles have a prehensile tail . Semi-aquatic anoles tend to have relatively tall , vertically flattened tails that aid in swimming.Underneath an anole 's toes are pads that have several to a dozen flaps of skin ( adhesive lamellae ) going horizontally and covered in microscopic hairlike protrusions ( setae ) that allow them to cling to many different surfaces , similar to but not quite as efficient as a gecko . Despite this similarity , they are very distantly related and the adaptions are the result of convergent evolution in the two groups . The extent of these structures and clinging ability varies , being more developed in anole species that live high in the tree canopy than ones living at lower levels . In one extreme are anoles that easily can run up windows . In the opposite end of the spectrum is the bulky anole of arid coastal Venezuela and adjacent Colombia , which is the only species completely lacking the specialized toe pad structures . The relative length of the limbs vary , mainly between different species , but to some extent also between different populations of a single species . This depends on things like the preferred perch size and whether there are ground-living predators in a habitat.Despite having relatively small eyes , their primary sense is sight , which is excellent and in color . Their pupils are round or nearly round . The Guantanamo anole and Cuban cave anole have a transparent `` window '' in their lower eyelid , allowing them to see even with closed eyes , but why they have this adaption is unclear . Anoles have a good directional hearing , which is able to detect frequencies between 1000 and 7000 Hz and relatively low intensity sounds like the click of a camera.Anoles are diurnal—active during the daytime—but can also be active during bright moonlit nights and may forage near artificial lights . Many species frequently bask in the sun to increase their temperature , but others are shade-living and do not . Colors Most anoles are brownish or green , but there are extensive variations depending on the exact species . The majority can change their color depending on things like emotions ( for example , aggression or stress ) , activity level , levels of light and as a social signal ( for example , displaying dominance ) , but evidence showing that they do it in response to the color of the background ( camouflage ) is lacking . Whether they do it in response to temperature ( thermoregulation ) is less clear , with studies supporting it and contradicting it . The extent and variations of this color changing ability differ widely throughout the individual species . For example , the Carolina ( or green ) anole can change its color from a bright , leafy green to a dull brown color , while the brown anole can only change its shade , ranging from pale gray-brown to very dark brown . Even the distinct green-to-brown change in the Carolina anole can happen in only a few minutes . The colors are the result of their skin pigment cells , the chromatophores , of which they have three main types , but the change occurs only in the melanophores . When triggered by melanophore-stimulating hormone and other hormones , the melanosomes of the melanophores partially cover the other skin pigment cells , giving the anole a darker or browner color . In most cases stress results in a darker/browner color , but in the aquatic anole , a species that is dark brown with a barred pattern and light brown stripes on the sides of its body and head , stress results in paler brown upperparts and the stripes turn pale blue-green.Their colors during the night when sleeping often differ distinctly from their colors during the day where awake . Among these are some species that otherwise do not drastically change their colors , including certain anoles that generally are brown during the day changing to greenish or whitish when sleeping at night , and certain anoles that generally are green during the day changing to brown when sleeping at night . Disregarding color change , minor individual variations in the basic color and pattern , mostly related to sex or age , are common . In some anole species this variation is more pronounced and not only related to sex and age . An example of this is the basic color of the Cayman blue-throated anole , which varies geographically , roughly matching the main habitat at a location . In others it occurs at the same location . This includes the extensive individual variations in the Guadeloupean anole , which however also shows some geographic variations , but possibly not consistent enough ( due in part to clines ) to make the typically recognized subspecies valid . In the Puerto Rican giant anole , a species only able to perform minor color changes ( essentially lightness/darkness ) , juveniles are gray-brown and adults typically green , but an uncommon morph maintains a gray-brown color into adulthood . Similarly , rare morphs of the usually green Carolina anole lack certain pigment cells , giving them a mainly turquoise-blue or yellow color . Dewlap Most—but not all—anole species have dewlaps , made of erectile cartilage ( modified from the hyoid ) and covered in skin , that extend from their throat areas . When not in use and closed it lies inconspicuously along the throat and chest . The size , shape , color and pattern of the dewlap vary extensively depending on species , and often it differs between the sexes , being smaller ( in some absent ) and/or less colorful in females . In a few species , including the Carolina , bark , Cochran 's gianthead and slender anoles , it varies geographically in color depending on subspecies or morph . Very locally , distinct morphs of a single species that differ in dewlap colors ( not just differences between sexes ) may occur together . In addition to colors that are visible to humans , dewlaps can have ultraviolet reflectance , which is visible to anoles . The striped anole is the only species where it is asymmetrically colored , being brighter on one side than the other . In some species even juveniles have a dewlap . The West Cuban and Cuban stream anoles are the only where both sexes lack a dewlap , but it is reduced and diminutive in about a dozen other species.The dewlap serves as a signal for attracting partners , territoriality , deterring predators and communicating condition . When several anoles live together the species almost always differ in their dewlap , indicating that it plays a role in species recognition . Studies however reveal a more complex pattern : The bark anole and shortnosed anole species complex ( which includes the Webster 's and Cochran 's gianthead anoles ) are closely related and both vary in their dewlap color . In places where their ranges overlap their dewlaps often differ and there is little hybridization , but in some location their dewlaps are alike . Where alike there can be higher levels of hybridization ( indicating that they are more likely to confuse each other ) or levels can be as low as regions where they differ ( indicating that something else allows them to separate each other ) . Another example is the red-fanned stout and large-headed anoles , which are sister species that overlap in range and are very similar except for their dewlap color . They are highly aggressive to individuals of their own species , but not the other . When one species has its dewlap color modified to resemble the other , only a relatively minor or no increase in aggression occurs , indicating that they still can separate each other.Several other Iguania genera , Draco , Otocryptis , Polychrus , Sarada and Sitana , have evolved relatively large , movable dewlaps independently of the anoles . Sexual dimorphism In some anoles the sexes are very similar and difficult to separated under normal viewing conditions , but most species exhibit clear sexual dimorphism , which allows one to fairly easily discern between adult males and females . In a few species the female is slightly larger than the male , but in others the sexes are about the same size . However , in most the males are larger , in some more than three times the mass of females . This size difference can result in differences in the microhabitat ( for example , males using larger branches than females ) and feeding ( males on average eating large prey ) between the sexes of a single species . Males of some species have proportionally far longer heads than females , but in others it is nearly alike . The crest along the nape , back and/or tail is larger in the males . In species with tall crests this difference can be obvious , but in small-crested species it is often inconspicuous and easily overlooked , especially when not raised . The dewlap is often larger in males ; in some species only the male has a dewlap . In a few there are differences in the shape of the nose , but this is only known to be prominent in the proboscis and leaf-nosed anoles , which both have long-nosed males and more normal looking females ( it is likely that something similar can be seen in smooth anole , but the female of that species is still unknown ) . A less obvious difference between anole sexes is the enlarged post-cloacal scales in males.The males of many species are overall more brightly colored , while females are duller , more cryptic , and sometimes their upperparts have striped or lined patterns that serve to break up the outline of the anole . In general , the juvenile colors and pattern resemble those of the adult female . The dewlap tends to be more colorful in males , with clear differences being common among anoles of the mainland of the Americas and comparatively rarer in the Caribbean species . Territoriality and breeding Anoles are highly territorial , and will fan their dewlap , bob their head , perform `` push-ups '' , raise their crest and do a wide range of other behaviors to scare away potential competitors . If this does not scare off the intruder , a fight proceeds in which the two anoles attempt to bite each other . During fights some species of anoles are known to vocalize . In addition to the behaviors indicating dominance , anoles may move their head up and down in a head-nod display ( not to be confused with the head-bob display where entire frontal part of body is moved through `` push-ups '' ) , which is a submissive sign . Females maintain a feeding territory . Males maintain a larger breeding territory , which overlaps with the feeding territory of one or several females . The home range is generally larger in males than in females , and larger in large anole species than in smaller . In a very small species like the Bahoruco long-snouted anole the home range can be as little is about 1.5 m2 ( 16 sq ft ) and 2.3 m2 ( 25 sq ft ) in a female and male , compared to a large species like the knight anole where they average about 630 m2 ( 6,800 sq ft ) and 650 m2 ( 7,000 sq ft ) . If removed from its territory an anole will usually be able to find its way back home in a relatively short time , but exactly how they do this is unclear . Being highly solitary animals , anoles will only infrequently congregate , but in colder regions individuals may rest adjacent to each other in groups during the winter.In addition to differences in the appearance of the dewlap , the frequency of the dewlap opening/closing and the frequency and amplitude of the head bobbing differ between species , allowing them to separate each other . Territoriality is typically aimed at other individuals of the same species , but in a few cases it is also directed towards other anoles , as can be seen between the crested and Cook 's anoles . Unlike most anoles with widely overlapping ranges , these two inhabit very similar niches and directly compete for resources . The breeding period varies . In species or populations living in highly seasonal regions it is generally relatively short , typically during the wet season . It is prolonged , often even year-round , in species or populations living in regions with less distinct seasons . In some species where it is year-round the egg production is however higher during the rainy season than the dry season , and in many where it is prolonged but not year-round , it begins in the spring and ends in the fall . Males attract and court females by performing a range of behaviors , often mirroring those used to scare away competitors , including extending their dewlap and bobbing their heads . During mating the male inserts one of his hemipenes into the female 's cloaca , fertilizing the egg inside the oviduct . The female may mate with multiple males , but is also able to store sperm inside her body for fertilization of eggs several months after mating . A female anole produces an egg in each ovary , meaning that when one is maturing in one of her follicles the yolk of another is forming in the other . The white shell only forms when the egg has been fertilized and females will sometimes lay infertile , unshelled yellowish eggs known as `` slugs '' . The female lays one ( occasionally two ) eggs per time , which typically is placed casually on the ground among leaf-litter , under debris , logs or rocks , or in a small hole . In some species it is placed at higher levels in a bromeliad , tree hole or rock crevice . A small number of species lay their eggs together , forming a communal nest . Among these is the unusual Cuban cave anole where as many as 25 eggs may be glued together in a small cavity on the side of a cave wall . A nest that contained eggs from the bay anole and the geckos Sphaerodactylus armasi and Tarentola crombiei represents the only known multi-species communal nest for an anole and the only known communal nest involving more than one family of lizard . Although typically only laying a single egg per time ( clutch ) , females of many anole species can lay an egg every five days to four weeks . Some only have a single clutch per year , while other species may have as many as 20 on average . Depending on species , anole eggs hatch after about 30–70 days . Feeding Anoles are opportunistic feeders , and may attempt to eat any attractive meal that is of the right size . They primarily feed on insects like flies , grasshoppers , crickets , caterpillars , moths , butterflies , beetles and ants , and arachnids like spiders . Several species will also eat small vertebrates such as mice , small birds ( including nestlings ) , lizards ( including other anole species and cannibalism of their own ) and frogs . The slow-moving Cuban false chameleon anoles ( `` Chamaeleolis '' ) are specialized snail-eaters , and a few semi-aquatic species like the Cuban stream anole may catch prey in water such as shrimp and fish . In some species the average prey-size varies with the individual anole 's size , age and sex , with juvenile anoles eating the smallest prey , adult females taking intermediate-sized prey and adult males the largest prey . In other species there are no clear differences in the preferred prey size , regardless of an individual 's size and sex.Hunting is done by sight , and they generally show a strong preference for moving prey over non-moving . Many will chase down or sneak up to a potential prey item , while others are sit-and-wait predators that pounce on prey when it gets close to the anole . Anoles have numerous small , sharp and pointed teeth that allow them to efficiently grab their prey . They are heterodonts with each tooth in the frontal half of the jaw having a single tip ( unicuspid ) and each in the rear half having three tips ( tricuspid ) ; one in the middle and a smaller behind and in front of it . Unusually , the Cuban false chameleon anoles have enlarged and blunt , molar-like teeth in the rear part of their jaw , allowing them to crush the shells of their snail prey.In addition to animal prey , many anole species will take plant material , notably fruits , flowers and nectar , and overall they are best described as omnivorous . Some fruit-eating species , like the knight anole , may function as seed dispersers . Anoles have been recorded drinking sweetened water from hummingbird feeders . Anoles are vulnerable to drying out and generally need access to water for drinking , like dew or rain on leaves , although some species are less susceptible to water loss than others and are able to live in relatively arid places . Predator avoidance and deterrence A wide range of animals will eat anoles , such as large spiders , centipedes , predatory katydids , snakes , large frogs , lizards , birds , monkeys , and carnivoran mammals . At least in part of their range , snakes may be the most significant predator of anoles . For example , the Caribbean Alsophis and Borikenophis racers , and the Mexican , Central American and South American Oxybelis vine snakes feed mostly on lizards like anoles . Some reptile-eating snakes have a specialized venom that has little effect on humans , but it rapidly kills an anole . On some Caribbean Islands anoles make up as much as 40–75 % of the diet of American kestrels . Large anoles may eat smaller individuals of other anole species and cannibalism—eating smaller individuals of their own species—is also widespread . There is a documented case of a small anole being captured and killed by an outside potted Venus flytrap plant.Anoles mainly detect potential enemies by sight , but their hearing range also closely matches the typical vocal range of birds . If hearing a predatory bird , like a kestrel or hawk , they increase their vigilance . When hearing a non-predatory bird little or no change happens . Most anole species will try to escape from a predator by rapidly running or climbing away , but some will move to the opposite side of a tree trunk ( facing away from the would-be attacker ) , jump to the ground from their perch , or freeze when disturbed , hoping the adversary does not spot it . Some anole species will show their fitness by displaying their dewlap when encountering a predator ; the greater the endurance of the anole , the greater the display . Conversely , when suddenly forced to share their habitat with an efficient anole predator like the northern curly-tailed lizard ( for example , if it is introduced to a place where formerly not present ) , the anoles may decrease the amplitude of their head bobbing , making them less conspicuous , and may become slower to emerge from hiding ( less willing to take a risk ) after having been scared by a predator . Slow-moving anoles , like the twig ecomorphs of the Caribbean and many Dactyloa species of mainland Central and South America , are generally cryptically colored and often coordinate their movements with the wind , resembling the surrounding vegetation . A few semi-aquatic species will attempt to escape from predators by diving into water or running bipedally across it , similar to basilisks . However , the anoles lack the specialized toe fringes that helps basilisks when doing this . Anole tails often have the ability to break off at special segments , which is known as autotomy . The tail continues to wriggle for a period after detaching , attracting the attention of the predator and commonly allowing the anole to escape . The tail is regenerated , but it takes more than two months to complete this process . About two dozen anoles , including almost all members of the latifrons species group , all in the chamaeleonides species group and the La Palma anole , do not have the ability to autotomize the tail.If caught or cornered , anoles will bite in self-defense . This can be relatively effective against some predators . When fighting back and biting , sometimes for as much as 20 minutes , Puerto Rican crested anoles escape from more than ​1⁄3 of all attacks by Puerto Rican racer snakes . Some species of anoles will vocalize ( typically rowls , chirps or squeals ) when caught . Evolution The evolution of anoles has been widely studied , and they have been described as a `` textbook example of adaptive radiation and convergent evolution '' . Especially the widespread convergent evolution seen in anoles living in the Greater Antilles has attracted the attention of scientists , and resulted in comparisons with the Darwin 's finches of the Galápagos Islands , lemurs of Madagascar and cichlid fish in the African Great Lakes . Ecomorphs and origin On each major Greater Antillean Island ( Cuba , Hispaniola , Puerto Rico and Jamaica ) , there are anole species that have adapted to specific niches and are referred to as ecomorphs : crown giant , trunk crown , trunk , trunk ground , twig and grass bush ( a few additional , less widely used ecomorphs also exist ) . However , even within the Greater Antilles there are differences depending on island size and the amount of available habitats . The largest , Cuba and Hispaniola , have all six primary ecomorphs , while the smaller Puerto Rico and Jamaica have five and four respectively . Species living in a specific niche on each island tend to resemble each other in both appearance and behavior . For example , the Escambray twig anole of Cuba closely resembles the Puerto Rican twig and Jamaican twig anoles , as well as several species of twig ecomorphs from Hispaniola . Despite this they are not closely related and have adapted to their specific niche independently of each other . At least four of the six primary ecomorphs are of ancient origin as they have been documented in amber fossils from Hispaniola that are about 15–20 million years old ( the two missing ecomorphs are crown giant and grass bush ) . Otherwise there are few known fossils , but early phylogenetic and immunological studies indicate that anoles originated 40–66 million years ago , first inhabitant Central or South America , and then came to the Caribbean ( initially likely Cuba or Hispaniola ) . A more recent phylogenetic study , published in 2012 , indicated that anoles originated in South America and diverged from other reptiles far earlier , about 95 million years ago . While a South American origin has been generally accepted , the very high age has been controversial and other studies published in 2011–2014 arrived at a lower age , estimating that anoles diverged from other reptiles 23–75 , 53–72 or 81–83 million years ago , while a comprehensive study from 2017 estimated about 46–65 million years ago . This indicates that early anoles arrived on the Greater Antillean Islands in the Caribbean from the mainland of the Americas via rafting rather than overland via ancient ( now submerged ) land bridges . After arriving in the Caribbean they diversified into several new groups and one of these , the Norops lineage , later made its way back to mainland of the Americas . Species and adaptability Species level evolution in anoles can be very slow . Martinique originally consisted of four tiny islands , which then merged into a single as a result of uplifting . Anoles lived on each of the tiny ancient islands and were isolated six to eight million years ago . Despite this long separation , they did not experience allopatric speciation , as mixed couples of the different Martinique anole populations can successfully reproduce and remain part of a single species . The Barbados anole is part of the same group , but Barbados remains a separate , isolated island . The genetic divergence between the different Martinique anole populations is similar to that between other Lesser Antillean anoles consistently recognized as separate species . Another Lesser Antillean species , the Guadeloupean anole , has several distinct populations that generally are recognized as subspecies . However , Guadeloupean anoles exhibit high individual variability and the populations widely intergrade , something that possibly has been enhanced by habitat changes by humans ( allowing populations to easier come into contact with each other ) and translocations of individuals . This indicates that the subspecies are invalid today . Genetic studies confirm that strong assortative mating between the different Guadeloupean anole populations does not exist , despite their distinct differences in appearance and them having separated about 650,000 years ago ( confidence interval starting at 351,000 years ) . Hybridization between different anole species has rarely been documented.In contrast to this , anoles can change rapidly in response to changes and they are one of the few known examples of `` visible evolution '' ( i.e. , where changes happen at a speed where they can be observed within a human lifetime ) , together with groups like stickleback fish , guppies and Peromyscus beach mice . In studies of brown anoles introduced to Florida it has been seen that they can become longer-legged in a single generation when living with the predatory , ground-living northern curly-tailed lizard ( shorter-legged anoles are slower and easier to catch for the curly-tailed lizard ) . Over a longer period , however , their legs become shorter , which are better suited for perching on smaller branches higher off the ground , out of reach for the curly-tailed lizard . When brown anoles are introduced to small islands with low vegetation , their legs become shorter , better suited for rapidly moving among the shrunken shrubbery to catch insects and avoid predatory birds . Furthermore , in a study where brown anoles were introduced to seven small , anole-free Bahaman islands ( anoles had disappeared because of Hurricane Frances ) , it was seen that—although all populations became shorter-legged within a few years—this was proportional to the leg-size of the founders . In other words : The few founder brown anoles introduced to one island were shorter-legged than the few introduced to another . Both populations became shorter-legged over time , but the first remained shorter-legged than the second . This is an example of the founder effect . Similarly , when brown anoles were introduced to Florida , the native Carolina ( or green ) anoles moved to higher perches and gained larger toe pads better suited for those perches . This adaptation occurred in just 20 generations . Anoles are also adapting to life with humans : Puerto Rican crested anoles living in cities have developed more adhesive lamellae on their toe pads than ones living in forests , reflecting the need for being able to climb very smooth surfaces like windows in the former habitat . In contrast to these fast changes , anole 's adaptability to temperature changes has traditionally been considered relatively minor . Nevertheless , when Puerto Rican crested anoles in Florida ( where introduced in the 1970s ) were compared to the original , native population in Puerto Rico , it was discovered that the former had become adapted to colder temperatures , by about 3 °C ( 5.4 °F ) . An even faster adaption was observed in Carolina anoles from Texas during the unusually cold winter of 2013–2014 . Carolina anoles living in central Texas and further north were already adapted to relatively cold temperatures , but those of southern Texas were not . However , after the winter of 2013–2014 , the cold tolerance of the southern Texan populations had increased by as much as 1.5 °C ( 2.7 °F ) and their genomic profiles had changed to more closely resemble the more northerly living Carolina anoles . Taxonomy The name for this group of lizards originates from the Carib anoli . It was modified and used in French Creole , and then transferred to English via the genus name Anolis , coined by French zoologist François Marie Daudin in 1802.Several family names have been used for the anoles in recent decades . Initially they were placed in Iguanidae . This family , then comprising several very different groups , was split into eight families in 1989 , with anoles being part of Polychrotidae together with Polychrus ( bush anoles ) . However , genetic studies have shown that Polychrus is closer to Hoplocercidae than the true anoles . The true anoles are closer to Corytophanidae ( basilisks and relatives ) . The true anoles have therefore been transferred to their own family Dactyloidae , alternatively listed as subfamily Dactyloinae of family Iguanidae . The name Anolidae ( Cope , 1864 ) has sometimes been used , but it is a junior synonym of Dactyloidae ( Fitzinger , 1843 ) .More than 425 species of true anoles are known . New species are regularly described , including 12 in 2016 alone . Most of the recent discoveries have been from the mainland of the Americas , with fewer new anoles described from the comparatively better-known Caribbean Islands . Genera Traditionally , all the true anoles were included in the genus Anolis and some continue to use this treatment , in which case it is the largest genus of reptile . An attempt of dividing this huge genus was already made in 1959–1960 , when they were placed in two major groups , the so-called `` alpha anoles '' ( comprising most anole subgroups ) and `` beta anoles '' ( equalling today 's Norops ) . In the following decades other changes were recommended . This included a proposal to recognize four genera , Anolis , Chamaeleolis , Chamaelinorops and Phenacosaurus , in 1976 . In 1986 , it was proposed that eight should be recognized : the four from 1976 , and Ctenonotus , Dactyloa , Norops and Semiurus ( the last was later replaced by its senior synonym Xiphosurus ) . These changes were adopted by some and rejected by others , who continued placing all in Anolis . In 1998–1999 , the first comprehensive molecular studies of the anoles were published , confirming the earlier suspicion that the so-called `` beta anoles '' are a monophyletic group , but the `` alpha anoles '' are not . Furthermore , the genus splits proposed in 1976 and 1986 caused problems , as the narrowly defined Anolis was not monophyletic . In 2004 , a major review based on several types of data ( both molecular and morphological ) revealed several groups and partially confirmed the genetic results from 1998–1999 . No major changes were proposed and all anoles were maintained in a broadly defined Anolis . Two recent studies , primarily genetic and published in 2012 and 2017 , confirmed several of the groups found in earlier studies , but rejected others . They found that the anoles fall into eight primary clades . Some of these can be further subdivided : For example , Chamaeleolis ( from Cuba ) is one of two subclades within Xiphosurus and it is sometimes considered a valid genus ( in which case Xiphosurus is restricted to Hispaniola , Puerto Rico and nearby smaller islands ) . In contrast , the earlier proposed genus Phenacosaurus ( from the Andes and tepui highlands in northwestern South America ) is now included in Dactyloa . The phylogenetic position of most species is clear , but in a few the available evidence is conflicting and/or labelled with considerable statistic uncertainty.The relationship of Dactyloidae can be described with a cladogram . Whether the eight groups are best recognized as separate genera or only as clades within a single genus , Anolis , is disputed . A few families between Polychrotidae and Corytophanidae+Dactyloidae are not shown : Relationship with humans Anoles are model organisms often studied in fields such as ecology , behavior , physiology and evolution . The Carolina ( or green ) anole is the most-studied anole species , with the earliest dedicated studies being more than 100 years old , from the late 1800s . The Carolina anole was the first reptile where the entire genome was sequenced.Anoles are harmless to humans , but if caught or cornered they will bite in self-defense . As typical of animals , the bite force is strongly correlated to the size of the anole . It causes little pain in the smaller anoles which usually do not break the skin . Large species have relatively strong jaws lined with small , sharp teeth , and their bite can be painful and result in a superficial wound , but it is still essentially harmless.Some anole species are commonly kept in captivity as pets and especially the Carolina ( or green ) anole is often described as a good `` beginner 's reptile '' , but it too requires specialized care.Anoles can function as a biological pest control by eating pest insects that may harm humans or plants . Anole abundances can be considerably higher in diversified agroecosystems ( multiple different plant types ) than high-intensity agroecosystems ( typically only one or very few plant types , and regular use of agrochemicals ) , making the former particularly suitable for this type of pest control . However , because of their potential of becoming invasive species , releasing anoles outside their native range is strongly discouraged and often illegal , even if the species occurs elsewhere in a country ( for example , it is illegal to release Carolina anoles in California , as its native range is in Southeastern United States ) . Conservation The willingness of many anoles of living close to humans in heavily altered habitats have made them common . Some anoles can occur in very high densities , as illustrated by the Saint Vincent bush , Puerto Rican bush and spotted anoles where it has been estimated that there locally are almost 28,000 individuals per hectare ( 11,500 per acre ) in the first species and at least 20,000–21,000 per hectare ( 8,000–8,500 per acre ) in the last two . However , in most species the density is lower and in rare anoles it is can be well below 100 individuals per hectare ( 40 per acre ) . Some are restricted to specific habitats such as primary rainforest , making them more vulnerable . In a review in 2017 , it was found that more than 50 anole species had a known total range that covered 100 km2 ( 40 sq mi ) or less around their type locality . As of April 2018 , only 90 anoles , equalling less than one-quarter of the total number of recognized species , had been rated by the IUCN . Most of these are either least concern ( not threatened ) or data deficient ( limited available data prevents an assessment ) , but 7 are considered vulnerable , 14 endangered and 1 critically endangered . Typical threats to these are habitat loss from both humans and extreme weather , or competition/predation by introduced species . For example , the Finca Ceres anole , a critically endangered species only known from a single unprotected location in Matanzas Province , Cuba , has suffered habitat loss both due to hurricanes and expanding agricultural land . A. amplisquamosus , an endangered species only known from highland forest in the Cusuco National Park region of Honduras , was common in the early 2000s , but by 2006 it had experienced a drastic decline and was only infrequently encountered . A clear explanation for this is lacking , although it may be related to habitat loss due to human development and agriculture . Similarly , A. landestoyi , which only was described in 2016 and has not been rated by the IUCN , is restricted to the Loma Charco Azul reserve in Hispaniola , but it is seriously threatened by continuing illegal habitat destruction by slash-and-burn agriculture , livestock grazing and production of wood charcoal . Another example of a species that has not been rated by the IUCN is the strikingly colored blue anole from Colombia 's Gorgona Island . It is threatened from deforestation and predation by the introduced western basilisks . Certain highly localized species can be threatened by other anoles . The Cook 's anole , found only in southwestern Puerto Rico and considered endangered by the Puerto Rico Department of Natural and Environmental Resources , faces habitat loss and fragmentation from human development , predation by introduced species ( especially cats and rats ) and direct competition from a more widespread native , the Puerto Rican crested anole . The Puerto Rican crested anole has also been introduced to Dominica where it locally is outcompeting the endemic Dominican anole , having already largely displaced the South Caribbean ecotype ( traditionally subspecies Anolis o. oculatus ) , which possibly may require a captive breeding program to ensure its survival.Nevertheless , anoles overall do not appear to have experienced the widespread extinctions and extirpations prevalent among larger Caribbean reptiles . The Culebra Island giant anole is the only anole considered possibly extinct in recent history ( other extinct anoles are prehistoric and only known from fossil remains that are millions of years old ) . Locals reported sighting of the Culebra Island giant anole as recent as the 1980s , but this likely involved misidentifications of young green iguanas . Others , at least the Morne Constant anole , do not grow as large today as they once did.Species restricted to a specific habitat in relatively remote regions , infrequently visited by biologists looking for reptiles , are often virtually unknown and rarely recorded . In a review in 2017 , it was found that 15 anole species only were known from their holotype . These may truly be rare and seriously threatened , as the proboscis anole , a species that only was known from a single specimen collected in 1953 until it was rediscovered in cloud forests of Ecuador in 2004 . In others with few records , like the Neblina anole , this is not the case . It was initially known from six 1980s specimens from the remote Neblina highlands in Venezuela , but when the Brazilian part of these highlands were visited in 2017 it was discovered that the species was locally abundant . Some species are easily overlooked , even if common . For example , if searching for Orces ' Andes anole during the night when asleep they can be fairly easy to find , but if visiting the same location during the day it can be very difficult to find any . As introduced species When introduced to regions outside their native range by humans , anoles may become invasive and represent a serious threat to small local animals . Such introductions may happen by mistake ( for example , as `` stowaways '' on garden plants ) or deliberately ( as predators introduced to combat insects or release of pet anoles people no longer want ) .In the contiguous United States , the Carolina anole has been introduced to California , the brown anole has been introduced to the Gulf Coast states and California , and the knight , Jamaican giant , bark , large-headed , Puerto Rican crested , Cuban green and Hispaniolan green anoles have been introduced to Florida . The Barbados and Morne Constant anoles have also been recorded in Florida , but do not appear to have become established . There are indications that the invasive brown anole is displacing the native Carolina anole in Florida and Texas by outcompeting it and eating its young . In the most disturbed habitats the Carolina anole may disappear entirely , but in less disturbed habitats where there is more cover ( allowing young to avoid predation ) it may remain fairly common , although it is forced to occur higher in trees where less visible to humans . Regardless , the Carolina anole is common and widespread overall , and it has itself been introduced to several regions outside its native range , including California , Kansas , Hawaii , Guam , Palau , the Bahamas , Cayman Islands , Anguilla , Belize , Tamaulipas in Mexico , and Japan 's Okinawa and Ogasawara ( Bonin ) Islands . Although there are several records from Spain ( both the mainland and the Canary Islands ) , none of these have become established . In Japan 's Ogasawara Islands , the introduced Carolina anoles have caused declines in native lizards and diurnal insects , including the near-extinction of the endemic Celastrina ogasawaraensis butterfly and five dragonfly species . This may be due to the ecological naïvete of the insects ( before the introduction , there were no diurnal , highly arboreal lizards ) and a very high anole density on these Japanese islands , as similar insect declines have not been reported from the Bahamas ( which already had diurnal , arboreal lizards ) , or Guam , Saipan and Hawaii ( where the anole density is lower ) . In addition to Florida , the Cuban green anole has been introduced to the Dominican Republic , São Paulo ( Brazil ) and Tenerife ( Spain ) . In Florida and the Dominican Republic it competes with native anoles ( Carolina anole and Hispaniolan green anole , respectively ) and it is feared that something similar may happen in São Paulo . The same pattern can be seen in Dominica where the introduced Puerto Rican crested anole locally has displaced the endemic Dominican anole . The brown anole and Graham 's anole have both been introduced to Bermuda where they threaten the very rare Bermuda skink . This problem has not been reported for the Leach 's and Barbados anoles , the other species introduced to Bermuda . In the Cayman Islands the endemic Cayman blue-throated anole has moved to higher perched in places where the introduced brown anole is present ( similar to the Carolina anole in places where brown anoles are present ) . Outside the Americas , the brown anole has been introduced to Hawaii , Tenerife , Singapore and Taiwan , and it is able to change ant communities on the last of these islands . See also Amphibians and Reptiles portal References External links Media related to Dactyloidae at Wikimedia Commons 