A barracuda is a large , predatory ray-finned fish known for its fearsome appearance and ferocious behaviour . The barracuda is a saltwater fish of the genus Sphyraena , the only genus in the family Sphyraenidae which was named by Constantine Samuel Rafinesque in 1815 . It is found in tropical and subtropical oceans worldwide ranging from the eastern border of the Atlantic Ocean to the Red Sea , on its western border the Caribbean Sea , and in tropical areas of the Pacific Ocean . Barracudas reside near the top of the water and near coral reefs and sea grasses . Barracudas are targeted by sport-fishing enthusiasts . Description Barracuda are snake-like in appearance , with prominent , sharp-edged , fang-like teeth , much like piranha , all of different sizes , set in sockets of their large jaws . They have large , pointed heads with an underbite in many species . Their gill covers have no spines and are covered with small scales . Their two dorsal fins are widely separated , with the anterior fin having five spines , and the posterior fin having one spine and 9 soft rays . The posterior dorsal fin is similar in size to the anal fin and is situated above it . The lateral line is prominent and extends straight from head to tail . The spinous dorsal fin is placed above the pelvic fins and is normally retracted in a groove . The caudal fin is moderately forked with its posterior edged double-curved and is set at the end of a stout peduncle . The pectoral fins are placed low on the sides . Its swim bladder is large . Speedy and dynamic , they are slim , with small scales . Barracudas also have two well-separated dorsal fins , a protruding lower jaw , and a large mouth with many large , sharp teeth.In most cases , a barracuda is dark gray , dark green , white , or blue on its upper body , with silvery sides and a chalky-white belly . Coloration varies somewhat between species . For some species , irregular and unorganized black spots or a row of darker cross-bars occur on each side . Their fins may be yellowish or dusky . Barracudas live primarily in oceans , but certain species , such as the great barracuda , live in brackish water . Some species grow quite large ( up to 65 inches or 165 cm in length ) , such as Sphyraena sphyraena , found in the Mediterranean Sea and eastern Atlantic ; Sphyraena picudilla , ranging on the Atlantic coast of tropical America from North Carolina to Brazil and reaching Bermuda . Other barracuda species are found around the world . Examples are Sphyraena argentea , found from Puget Sound southwards to Cabo San Lucas , Sphyraena jello , from the seas of India and the Malay Peninsula and Archipelago . Species 28 species in this genus are recognized : Sphyraena arabiansis E. M. Abdussamad , Ratheesh , Thangaraja , Bineesh & D. Prakashan , 2015 ( Arabian barracuda ) Sphyraena acutipinnis F. Day , 1876 ( Sharpfin barracuda ) Sphyraena afra W. K. H. Peters , 1844 ( Guinean barracuda ) Sphyraena argentea Girard , 1854 ( Pacific barracuda ) Sphyraena barracuda ( G. Edwards , 1771 ) ( Great barracuda ) Sphyraena borealis DeKay , 1842 ( Northern sennet ) Sphyraena chrysotaenia Klunzinger , 1884 ( Yellowstripe barracuda ) Sphyraena ensis D. S. Jordan & C. H. Gilbert , 1882 ( Mexican barracuda ) Sphyraena flavicauda Rüppell , 1838 ( Yellowtail barracuda ) Sphyraena forsteri G. Cuvier , 1829 ( Bigeye barracuda ) Sphyraena guachancho G. Cuvier , 1829 ( Guachanche barracuda ) Sphyraena helleri O. T. Jenkins , 1901 ( Heller 's barracuda ) Sphyraena iburiensis Doiuchi & Nakabo , 2005 Sphyraena idiastes Heller & Snodgrass , 1903 ( Pelican barracuda ) Sphyraena intermedia Pastore , 2009 Sphyraena japonica Bloch & J. G. Schneider , 1801 ( Japanese barracuda ) Sphyraena jello G. Cuvier , 1829 ( Pickhandle barracuda ) Sphyraena lucasana T. N. Gill , 1863 ( Lucas barracuda ) Sphyraena novaehollandiae Günther , 1860 ( Australian barracuda ) Sphyraena obtusata G. Cuvier , 1829 ( Obtuse barracuda ) Sphyraena picudilla Poey , 1860 ( Southern sennet ) Sphyraena pinguis Günther , 1874 ( Red barracuda ) Sphyraena putnamae D. S. Jordan & Seale , 1905 ( Sawtooth barracuda ) Sphyraena qenie Klunzinger , 1870 ( Blackfin barracuda ) Sphyraena sphyraena ( Linnaeus , 1758 ) ( European barracuda ) Sphyraena tome Fowler , 1903 Sphyraena viridensis G. Cuvier , 1829 ( Yellowmouth barracuda ) Sphyraena waitii W. Ogilby , 1908 Behavior and diet Barracudas are ferocious , opportunistic predators , relying on surprise and short bursts of speed , up to 27 mph ( 43 km/h ) , to overtake their prey . Adults of most species are more or less solitary , while young and half-grown fish frequently congregate . Barracudas prey primarily on fish ( which may include some as large as themselves ) . They kill and consume larger prey by tearing chunks of flesh . Barracuda are competitive species and often are seen competing against mackerel , needle fish and sometimes even dolphins for prey.Barracuda feed on an array of prey including fish such as jacks , grunts , groupers , snappers , small tunas , mullets , killifishes , herrings , and anchovies by simply biting them in half . They also seem to consume smaller species of sustenance that are in front of them . Barracudas are usually found swimming in saltwater searching for schools of plankton-feeding fish . Their silver and elongated bodies make them difficult for prey to detect , and even more difficult to be seen when viewing them head-on . Barracudas depend heavily on their eyesight when they are out hunting . When hunting , they tend to notice everything that has an unusual color , reflection , or movement . Once a barracuda targets an intended victim , its long tail and matching anal and dorsal fins enable it to move with swift bursts of speed to attack its prey before it can escape . Barracudas generally attack schools of fish , speeding at them head first and biting at them with their jaws . When barracudas age , they tend to swim alone . However , there are times where they tend to stay with the pack . Barracudas will sometimes swim in groups . In this case , they can relocate schools of fish into compact areas or lead them into shallow water to more easily feed on them . Interactions with humans Like sharks , some species of barracuda are reputed to be dangerous to swimmers . Barracudas are scavengers , and may mistake snorkellers for large predators , following them hoping to eat the remains of their prey . Swimmers have reported being bitten by barracudas , but such incidents are rare and possibly caused by poor visibility . Large barracudas can be encountered in muddy shallows on rare occasion . Barracudas may mistake things that glint and shine for prey . One incident reported a barracuda jumping out of water and injuring a kayaker , but Jason Schratwieser , conservation director of the International Game Fish Association , said that the wound could have been caused by a houndfish.Handfeeding or touching large barracudas in general is to be avoided . Spearfishing around barracudas can also be dangerous , as they may be attracted to the injured animals and attempt to eat them . As food Barracudas are popular both as food and game fish . They are most often eaten as fillets or steaks . Larger species , such as the great barracuda , have been implicated in cases of ciguatera food poisoning . Those who have been diagnosed with this type of food poisoning display symptoms of gastrointestinal discomfort , limb weakness , and an inability to differentiate hot from cold effectively.West Africans smoke them for use in soups and sauces . Smoking protects the soft flesh from disintegrating in the broth and gives it a smoky flavour . In popular culture The barracuda prominently appeared in the 2003 Disney/Pixar animated film Finding Nemo , in the beginning of the film . Before the main titles in the film and in the 3D release , the barracuda closes its teeth and the bottom lip is shown in the film . The barracuda also appeared as an easter egg in the 2019 Disney/Pixar animated film Toy Story 4 . It was stuffed and mounted in display in the Second Chances antique store . Barracuda is the title of a 1977 hit song by the band Heart . The Pokémon Arrokuda and its evolution Barraskewda ( both introduced to the franchise in Pokémon Sword and Shield ) are based on the barracuda . Gallery References External links Ichthyological Bulletin ; No . 3 : The fishes of the Family Sphyraenidae in the Western Indian Ocean 