The bluebirds are a group of medium-sized , mostly insectivorous or omnivorous birds in the order of Passerines in the genus Sialia of the thrush family ( Turdidae ) . Bluebirds are one of the few thrush genera in the Americas . They have blue , or blue and rose beige , plumage . Female birds are less brightly colored than males , although color patterns are similar and there is no noticeable difference in size between the two birds . Species Bluebirds species include : Behaviour Bluebirds are territorial and prefer open grassland with scattered trees . This is similar to the behavior of many species of woodpeckers . Bluebirds can typically produce between two and four broods during the spring and summer ( March through August in the Northeastern United States ) . Males identify potential nest sites and try to attract prospective female mates to those nesting sites with special behaviors that include singing and flapping wings , and then placing some material in a nesting box or cavity . If the female accepts the male and the nesting site , she alone builds the nest and incubates the eggs . Predators of young bluebirds in the nests can include snakes , cats , and raccoons . Bird species competing with bluebirds for nesting locations include the common starling , American crow , and house sparrow , which take over the nesting sites of bluebirds , killing young , smashing eggs , and probably killing adult bluebirds . Bluebirds are attracted to platform bird feeders , filled with grubs of the darkling beetle , sold by many online bird product wholesalers as mealworms . Bluebirds will also eat raisins soaked in water . In addition , in winter bluebirds use backyard heated birdbaths . By the 1970s , bluebird numbers had declined by estimates ranging to 70 % due to unsuccessful competition with house sparrows and starlings , both introduced species , for nesting cavities , coupled with a decline in habitat . However , in late 2005 , Cornell University 's Laboratory of Ornithology reported bluebird sightings across the southern U.S. as part of its yearly Backyard Bird Count , a strong indication of the bluebird 's return to the region . This upsurge can be attributed largely to a movement of volunteers establishing and maintaining bluebird trails . In the garden Bluebirds ' consumption of insects make them popular with gardeners . In culture Iroquois In traditional Iroquois cosmology , the call of the bluebird is believed to ward off the icy power of Sawiskera , also referred to as Flint , the spirit of the winter . Its call caused Sawiskera to flee in fear and the ice to recede . As a symbol in songs '' Bluebird of Happiness '' is a song composed in 1934 by Sandor Harmati , with words by Edward Heyman and additional lyrics by Harry Parr-Davies . ( There 'll Be Bluebirds Over ) The White Cliffs of Dover was composed in 1941 by Walter Kent to lyrics by Nat Burton looking forward to a time when World War II would be over . Burton was unaware that the bluebird was not indigenous to England . Vera Lynn popularised the song , with her performances to the troops . Songwriters have portrayed the bluebird as a muse , as in the song `` Voices in the Sky '' by the British rock group The Moody Blues , from their 1968 album In Search of the Lost Chord.Birdhouse in Your Soul , the 1989 ode to a night light by the band They Might Be Giants references a “ bluebird of friendliness ” and a “ blue canary ” in its lyrics . The titular bluebird of the song `` Birds '' , from the 2013 album Government Plates by the Sacramento-based experimental hip hop group Death Grips , is thought to be referencing Charles Bukowski 's poem `` Bluebird '' , wherein bluebirds represent vulnerability that Bukowski felt as a result of child abuse from his father . See also Bluebird of happiness Footnotes External links Eastern Bluebird at All About Birds , The Cornell Lab—descriptions , including range , calls and physical description Thrush videos on the Internet Bird Collection North American Bluebird Society Sialis—Information on bluebirds and their conservation and restoration . 